Guide to laboratory tests  |  96
HAEMATOLOGY
Full blood count (FBC)
Analyte Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Haemoglobin Inland:
Sea level:M  14.3 − 18.3M  13.0 − 17.0g/dl ↑: Polycythaemia .
↓: Anaemia (bleeding, nutritional deficiencies, 
malabsorption, chronic illness, haemolysis and bone marrow failure (inherited or acquired).Inland:Sea level:F   12.1 − 16.3
F   12.0 − 15.0g/dl
Red cell count Inland:
Sea level:M  4.89 − 6.11M  4.50 − 5.5010
12/l↑: Polycythaemia, thalassaemia .
↓: Anaemia .
Inland:
Sea level:F   4.13 − 5.67
F   3.80 − 4.801012/l
Haematocrit Inland:Sea level:M  43.0 − 55.0 M  40.0 − 50.0% ↑: Polycythaemia .
↓: Anaemia .
Inland:Sea level:F   37.0 − 49.0 
F   36.0 − 46.0%
MCV  
(mean 
corpuscular 
volume)79.1 – 98.9 fl↑: Macrocytic red cells .
Check peripheral blood smear for round or oval macrocytes . 
Oval macrocytes are associated with  megaloblastic anaemia  
(e.g. vit B12 / folate deficiency).  
Round macrocytes are associated with liver disease, hypothyroidism, antiretroviral therapy, alcohol, chemotherapy, reticulocytosis and myelodysplasia .97  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Analyte Ref. Range Units Interpretation
↓: Microcytic red cells 
Iron deficiency, thalassaemia, other 
haemoglobin defects,  anaemia of chronic 
disease, lead poisoning, sideroblastic 
anaemia .
MCH (mean corpuscular 
haemoglobin)27.0 – 32.0 pg ↑: Hyperchromatic red cells e .g. spherocytes .
↓: Hypochromic (pale) red cells  
(Causes as for microcytic cells).
MCHC (mean 
corpuscular haemoglobin concentration)31 – 37 g/dl ↑: Spherocytes, bilirubinaemia, auto-
agglutination, lipaemic sample .
Red cell distribution width (RDW)M 10 – 16.3
F  10 – 17.3% If raised it means there are red cells of different sizes . 
Often the earliest sign of a nutritional deficiency .Guide to laboratory tests  |  98
Analyte Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Platelet count 150 – 450 109/l↑: Thrombocytosis
Reactive causes should firstly be excluded 
e.g. iron deficiency, trauma, infection, and 
malignancy . If no reason is found and platelets 
remain increased, a chronic myeloproliferative disorder should be excluded .  Platelet 
anisocytosis will be important to evaluate .
↓: Thrombocytopenia
Production defect
 – bone marrow infiltration or 
failure  
Peripheral loss mechanism e .g. peripheral 
destruction (ITP)  
Pooling / sequestration (hypersplenism) or usage ( e.g. DIC,TTP).
White cell count 3.92 – 9.88 10
9/l If abnormal, evaluate the differential white cell count .99  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Analyte Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Lymphocytes 1.0 – 4.0 109/l↑: Lymphocytosis
Primary causes:  Lymphoproliferative disorders 
e.g. CLL, lymphoma overspill into the blood 
Reactive causes e .g. viral infections, Bordetella 
pertussis, stress lymphocytosis (e .g. myocardial 
infarction, surgery, trauma), smoking, post splenectomy and autoimmune disorders .
↓: Lymphopenia
Inherited:  congenital immunodeficiencies . 
Acquired: e .g. viral infections, TB, lymphoma, 
aplastic anaemia, immunosuppressive therapy, radiation, renal failure, autoimmune diseases and negative acute-phase response .
Neutrophils 2.0 – 7.5 10
9/l↑: Neutrophil leucocytosis
Bacterial infection, inflammation, trauma / surgery, neoplasia, haemorrhage, haemolysis, pregnancy, metabolic e .g. diabetic 
ketoacidosis, drugs e .g. steroids, growth factor 
therapy e .g. G-CSF .
↓: Neutropenia
Decreased production:
• General bone marrow failure e .g. aplastic 
anaemia, acute leukaemia .
• Specific failure of neutrophil production e .g. 
congenital, cyclical, drug inducedGuide to laboratory tests  |  100
Analyte Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Peripheral loss:
e.g. hypersplenism, autoimmune destruction, 
severe infection .
Monocytes 0.18 – 1.00 109/l↑: Monocytosis  
Infections e .g. TB, CMV, subacute bacterial 
endocarditis, syphilis  
Inflammatory and immune disorders e .g. SLE, 
RA,ulcerative colitis, sarcoidosis . 
Haematological malignancies e .g. CMML, 
AML. 
Non-haematological malignancies . 
Chronic neutropenias .
↓: Monocytopenia  
Haematological disorders e .g. Aplasia, hairy 
cell leukaemia, autoimmune e .g. RA, SLE, HIV .
Eosinophils 0.0	−	0.45 109/l↑: Eosinophilia  
Allergy e .g. asthma, parasites, skin disease, 
drug sensitivity, connective tissue disease, Hodgkin lymphoma, chronic myeloproliferative disorders, hypereosinophilic syndrome .
Basophils 0.0	−	0.2 10
9/l Usually increased in chronic myeloproliferative disorders e .g. chronic myeloid leukaemia .101  |  Ampath Desk Reference
ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate)
It measures the rate of fall of a column of red cells in plasma during one hour .
Largely determined by the concentration of plasma proteins e .g. fibrinogen, other acute-phase 
proteins and immunoglobulins .
Raised ESR is a non-specific indicator of an acute-phase response and is of value in monitoring 
disease activity e .g. rheumatoid arthritis .
Normal value: Male 1 – 15 mm / hour and female 1 – 20 mm / hour  
(Wintrobe or Westergren method).
Causes of an elevated ESR include:
• Inflammatory disorders e .g. rheumatoid arthritis, temporal arthritis, polymyalgia rheumatica, SLE .
• Infections e .g. TB, HIV .
• Malignancy .
• Myeloma .
• Anaemia .
• Pregnancy .
Causes of a decreased ESR:
• Polycythaemia .
• Hypofibrinogenaemia .
• Congestive heart failure . 
• Spherocytosis . 
• Sickle cells . Guide to laboratory tests  |  102
Investigation of a bleeding disorder
Clinical evaluation is important prior to requesting lab tests . Five important questions should be 
asked, if all negative, no tests may be required . The questions are: 
• Is it real? Did the patient bleed with previous surgery, tooth extraction, during menstruation, 
circumcision, child birth, etc; keeping in mind that this may be a new cause of bleeding tendency .
• Is it a primary or secondary haemostatic dysfunction, with epistaxis, petechiae, mucosal bleeding indicating a primary (platelet / endothelial  type) defect and muscle / joint bleeds pointing to a secondary (clotting factor defect).
• Is there a family history? Often this helps in requesting the correct tests .
• Does the patient have any systemic disorder that influences haemostatic function, e .g. 
haematological, renal or hepatic disorders .
• Which medication, including over-the-counter drugs is the patient taking that may be the cause of bleeding?
Start with the basic coagulation screen (PT, APTT, fibrinogen, thrombin time, platelet count and bleeding time). See table for interpretation of results .  Normal screening values may be found with 
minor factor deficiencies and factor levels may then rather be done .103  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Basic coagulation screen
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Prothrombin 
time (PT)Efficiency of the extrinsic clotting 
pathway .  9.0 – 11.2 seconds
Prolonged :
Warfarin therapy
Rivaroxaban (Xeralto) therapy (neoplastin)Liver disease .
Vit K deficiency . 
DIC.
Clotting factor deficiency or defect(I, II, V, VII, X).
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)Efficiency of the intrinsic clotting pathway .22.0 – 30.7 seconds
Prolonged:Heparin therapy (esp . unfractionated) or 
heparin contamination .
Dabigatran (Pradaxa) therapyDIC.
Liver disease .
Massive transfusion .
Lupus anticoagulant .
Clotting factor defects (other than FVII).Also moderately prolonged in patients on warfarin and in vit K deficiency .Guide to laboratory tests  |  104
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Thrombin time 
(TT)Fibrinogen to fibrin stage .14.0	−	21.0	 seconds
Prolonged:Very sensitive to unfractionated heparin (LMWH can slightly prolong it at therapeutic levels).Dabigatran (Pradaxa) therapy Hypofibrinogenaemia – as with DIC or congenital defect / deficiency .
Dysfibrinogenaemia – inherited or acquired (in liver disease) or physiologically in neonates .
Raised concentrations of FDP as with DIC or liver disease .
Hypoalbuminaemia .
Grossly elevated fibrinogen .
Fibrinogen Plasma level . 1.8 – 3.5 g/l ↑: Acute-phase .
↓: DIC, liver disease, fibrinogen deficiency or 
dysfibrinogenaemia .
Platelet count Number of platelets in the blood .150	−	450 10
9/l ↓: Production defect – bone marrow
infiltration / failure .
Peripheral loss mechanism e .g. immune 
(ITP), hypersplenism, DIC, TTP , etc .105  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Bleeding 
time  
(Ivy method)Platelet function and 
capillary integrity .
Time measured for bleeding to stop after an incision is made on the forearm of the 
patient in standardised 
manner .
NB: platelet count 
should be normal .3	−	9 minutes
Increased:Platelet dysfunction:• Acquired e .g. aspirin, plavix, uraemia, 
myeloproliferative neoplasms, myelodysplasia and  the presence of a paraprotein . 
• Congenital e .g. Von Willebrand’s 
disease, storage pool defect, Bernard-Soulier syndrome etc .
Vascular disorders e .g. Ehlers-Danlos’s 
syndrome .
Important: a normal bleeding time does not imply normal haemostasis and it does not correlate well with bleeding at other sites or with intra-operative bleeding . Guide to laboratory tests  |  106
Interpretation of basic coagulation screen
PT APTT TT FibrinogenPlatelet 
countConditions
Prolonged Normal Normal Normal Normal Factor VII deficiency .
Early oral anticoagulation .
Mild factor II, V or X deficiency .
Lupus anticoagulant with some 
reagents .
Normal Prolonged Normal Normal Normal Factor VIII, IX, XI, XII, prekallikrein, HMWK deficiency / defect .
Von Willebrand’s disease .
Lupus anticoagulant .
Mild II, V or X deficiency .
Unfractionated heparin
Prolonged Prolonged Normal Normal Normal Vit K deficiency .
Warfarin therapy .
Factor II, V or X  deficiency .
Multiple factor deficiency e .g. liver 
failure .
Combined V & VIII deficiency .
Prolonged Prolonged Prolonged Normal or lowNormal Heparin in large amount .
Liver disease .
Fibrinogen deficiency / disorder .
Hyperfibrinolysis .
Inhibition of fibrin polymerization .107  |  Ampath Desk Reference
PT APTT TT FibrinogenPlatelet 
countConditions
Prolonged Prolonged Prolonged Low Low DIC.
Acute liver disease .
Prolonged Prolonged Normal Normal or 
lowLow Massive transfusion .
Liver disease .
Normal Normal Normal Normal Low Thrombocytopenia .
Consider causes for thrombocytopenia .
Normal Normal Normal Normal Normal Platelet dysfunction .
Factor XIII deficiency .
Mild Von Willebrand’s disease .
Vascular disorder .
Disorder of fibrinolysis .
Mild or masked coagulation factor deficiency .
Normal haemostasis .
Reference: Dacie and Lewis: Practical Haematology
• If PT, APTT, thrombin time, fibrinogen and platelet count are normal and the patient has a significant 
bleeding history, further investigation is needed to exclude a platelet function disorder and other rarer disorders e .g. fibrinolytic defects (tPa, PAI, antiplasmin), Von Willebrand disease and FXIII deficiency . Guide to laboratory tests  |  108
Laboratory assessment for Von Willebrand disease (VWD)
Initial tests:
• Von Willebrand antigen (VWF: Ag)
• Von Willebrand activity  (Ristocetin cofactor activity) 
• Factor VIII 
Additional tests :
• Von Willebrand multimeric analysis if antigen and / or activity is decreased .
• Platelet aggregation study with ristocetin (RIPA).
• VWF collagen-binding assay .
Based on the results of these tests, the diagnosis can be made of:• Type 1 Von Willebrand disease (mild quantitative defect).
• Type 2 Von Willebrand disease (subclassified as type 2A, 2B, 2M or 2N) (qualitative / functional defect).  
• Type 3 Von Willebrand disease (severe quantitative defect).
NB: Testing for Von Willebrand disease should be done in the absence of any acute-phase responses 
(VWF is an acute-phase protein).
Systemic inflammation, infection, pregnancy, oestrogen / oral contraceptives, stress e .g. surgery can 
cause an increase in levels of VWF and mask lower baseline levels .
Individuals with bloodgroup O have plasma VWF levels that are 25 – 30% lower than those with 
bloodgroup A, B or AB .  In patients with borderline results, it is often helpful to repeat the diagnostic 
test on two or 3 occasions and to study available family members .109  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Platelet aggregation studies
Platelet aggregation responses to different agonists are measured .  
It detects congenital and acquired abnormalities of platelet function .
Agonist Ref. Range Units Interpretation/causes
ADP (10 µM/ml) 50	−	100	 % ↓: Drugs e .g. clopidogrel and aspirin; storage pool 
defect .
Collagen (10 µg/ml) 50	−	100	 % ↓: Storage pool defect; aspirin; cyclo-oxygenase 
and thromboxane synthetase deficiency .
Arachidonic acid (1.5 mM/ml) 50	−	100	 %↓: Aspirin; storage pool defect; cyclo-oxygenase 
and thromboxane synthetase deficiency .
Ristocetin high concentration 
(1.25 mg/ml)50	−	100	 % ↓: Bernard-Soulier syndrome – confirm with flow 
cytometry for Gp Ib 
Von Willebrand disease .
Ristocetin low concentration (0.5 mg/ml)<10 % ↑: Von Willebrand disease type 2 b (functional 
defect).
If ↓ with ADP , Collagen and Arachidonic acid; and often primary wave only with RistocetinGlanzman thrombasthenia .
Confirm with flow cytometry for Gp IIbIIIa
PFA-200 (for evaluating platelet function) 
(Special acknowledgement – Dr Rita Govender; Pathchat Edition no . 23)
This test may be seen as a cross between bleeding time and quick aggregation testing . 
Availability: 
Testing on the PFA 200 requires a sample <4 hours old . 
Request for the test must take into account the sample's transit time to the laboratory that hosts the 
instrument . Guide to laboratory tests  |  110
Principle : 
• Citrated whole blood is aspirated at high shear rates through disposable cartridges .
• The cartridge contains an aperture within a membrane coated with either collagen and epinephrine 
(Col / EPI) or collagen and ADP (Col / ADP).  
• The agonists induce platelet adhesion, activation and aggregation, resulting in occlusion of the 
aperture and hence cessation of blood flow . Parameter is reported as closure time . 
Variables affecting results : 
• Test must be performed within 4 hours of blood collection . 
• HCT <35% and platelet count <150 may affect closure times . 
• Samples with HCT >50% and platelet count >500 have not been evaluated . 
• Fatty acids, lipaemia . 
• Haemolysis of sample . 
Advantages:
• Small volume of citrated venous blood (therefore suitable for paediatric samples as well) 
• Insensitive to clotting factor deficiency (not dependent on plasma fibrinogen of fibrin generation) 
• Better standardisation 
• No influence on result from oedema, loss of connective tissue, presence of fragile vessels (as in 
bleeding time performed in elderly patients) 
Interpretation:
Normal AspirinVon Willebrand DiseaseGlanzmann thrombasthenia
Col / EPI Normal	(82	−	150	s) Prolonged Prolonged Prolonged
Col / ADP Normal	(62	−	100	s) Normal Prolonged Prolonged111  |  Ampath Desk Reference
In the event of abnormal results, further testing is indicated, especially if history supports a bleeding 
diathesis .  
Consultation with a clinical haematologist or haematopathologist is strongly recommended . 
Please keep in mind: The test may be normal despite abnormal platelet function e .g. in: 
• Storage Pool Disease 
• Primary secretion defects 
• Mild VWDx 
The need for further testing must be guided by history and clinical features supportive of platelet disorder . 
References:Bain, B .J., Bates, I ., Laffan, M .A. & Lewis, S .M. 2012. 
Dacie and Lewis Practical Haematology, 11th edition, Churchill Livingstone . 
British Committee for Standards in Haematology . 2011.
Postgraduate haematology: guidelines for laboratory investigation of inheritable platelet disorders Aug 2011 
Thromboelastogram (TEG)
What is tested:
The rate of clot formation, the kinetics of clot formation, the strength and stability of the clot . 
Indication: Investigation of patients with abnormal bleeding during and after surgery . It can guide in the specific 
treatment needed . It is also requested by some physicians as part of pre-operative work-up .  Its 
usefulness to predict bleeding or thrombosis is however debatable .Guide to laboratory tests  |  112
Different aspects of TEG Ref. Range Units Interpretation
R-time (reaction time)
Measures the time between the 
start of the test until the first sign of fibrin formation3	−	8 min If prolonged, it indicates a longer time for fibrin to form and may be due to a clotting factor defect or anticoagulant therapy .
K-time
Measures the speed to reach a certain level of clot strength .1	−	3 min Dependent on the availability of fibrinogen and FXIII and to a lesser extent platelets .
Alpha angle
Measures the rapidity of fibrin  
build-up and cross-linking  
(clot strengthening)55 − 78 min Dependent on the availability of fibrinogen and FXIII and, to a lesser extent, platelets .
Different aspects of TEG Ref. Range Interpretation
Maximum amplitude (MA)Direct function of the maximum dynamic properties of fibrin and platelet bonding via GPIIb / IIIa and represents the ultimate strength / 
stability of the fibrin clot
.51	−	69 Affected by platelet function and to a lesser extent by 
fibrinogen concentration .
A small MA usually indicates a thrombocytopenia or platelet dysfunction .
Thromboelastogram index
 
(mathematic product of the netto effect of the R-time, K-time, alpha angle and MA measurements).-3 – +3
<-3:  hypocoagulable>3+: hypercoagulable, especially if >5.113  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Other specialised coagulation tests (D-dimer and FDP)
Analyte What is tested Normal 
valuesUnits Interpretation
D-dimer (XDP) Measures 
cross- 
linked fibrin 
degradation 
products 0 – 0.50 mg/l↑: Causes:  
DIC. 
DVT/Pulmonary embolism . 
Recent surgery . 
Trauma . 
Pregnancy . 
Infection . 
Cancer . 
Elderly patients (approximately 0.age for cut-off)  
Acute coronary syndromes . 
Cardiac or renal failure . 
Acute non-lacunar stroke .
Circulatory half-life of D-dimer is about 12 hours .
Elevated D-dimer can therefore persist for some time after the active process has ceased .
D-dimer should always be interpreted in the 
clinical context and not on its own.
Fibrin and 
fibrinogen degradation products (FDP)Semi- quantitative detection of FDP in plasma<5 µg/ml ↑: Acute venous thromboembolism . 
Myocardial infarction . 
Severe pneumonia . 
After major surgery . 
Systemic fibrinolysis associated with DIC . 
Thrombolytic therapy with streptokinase .Guide to laboratory tests  |  114
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) screen
There is no single laboratory test that can establish or rule out the diagnosis of DIC .  
The diagnosis should be made based on an appropriate clinical suspicion supported by relevant 
laboratory tests .  If clinically indicated, repeat testing should be done if initial results are negative . 
Tests used in the diagnosis and evaluation of patients with possible DIC :
Prothrombin time (PT) ↑
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) ↑
Thrombin time (TT) ↑
Fibrinogen normal or ↓
XDP (D-dimer) ↑FDP ↑Platelets ↓Blood smear: red cell fragments
ISTH diagnostic scoring system for DIC (International Society of Thrombosis and Haemostasis):Scoring system for overt DIC:Risk assessment:  Does the patient have an underlying disorder known to be associated with overt 
DIC?
If yes: proceed .
If not: do not use this algorithm .
Score 
Platelet count (>100 x 10
9/l = 0, <100 x 109/l  = 1, <50 x 109/l = 2).
Elevated fibrin marker (e .g. D-dimer, fibrin degradation products).
(no increase = 0, moderate increase = 2, strong increase = 3).
Prolonged PT (<3 s = 0, >3 s BUT <6 s = 1, >6 s =2).Fibrinogen level (>1 g/l = 0, <1 g/l = 1).115  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Calculate score:
≥5	compatible	with	overt	DIC:	repeat	score	daily.
<5 suggestive of non-overt DIC: repeat within 1 – 2 days .
Tests used in the investigation of a thrombotic tendency
Testing	should	be	done	prior	to	starting	anticoagulation	or	7	−	10	days	after	completion	of	anticoagulation therapy .
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Protein S Free Prot S level .
Prot S is a vit K dependent natural anticoagulant that potentiates the function of protein C .M	60	−	140
F		70	−	140% ↓:Congenital deficiency . 
Acquired deficiencies:  
• Warfarin therapy . 
• Oestrogen-containing oral contraceptives . 
• Pregnancy . 
• Hormone replacement therapy . 
• Acute-phase reaction . 
• Liver disease . 
• Nephrotic syndrome . 
• L-asparaginase chemotherapy . 
• DIC . 
• Some patients with antiphospholipids .Guide to laboratory tests  |  116
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Units Interpretation
Protein C Prot C function
Prot C is a vit 
K dependent 
anticoagulant .
After activation by thrombin, it forms 
complexes with prot 
S and phospholipids 
to degrade factors Va and VIIIa .70	−	140 % ↓:Congenital deficiency . 
Acquired deficiencies:  
• Warfarin therapy . 
• Liver disease . 
• DIC . 
• Early post-operative period . 
 
The presence of aprotinin may result in 
an underestimation of protein C level .
Antithrombin Antithrombin function .
It is an inhibitor of 
thrombin and its action is enhanced by heparin .
It also inhibits factor Xa 
and, to a lesser extent, 
IXa, XIa,XIIa, plasmin and kallikrein .80	−	120 % ↓:Congenital deficiency . 
Acquired deficiency:  
• DIC  
• Nephrotic syndrome . 
• Liver disease . 
• L-asparaginase chemotherapy . 
• Current massive thrombosis . 
• Inflammatory bowel disease .
Some test procedures may be affected by heparin therapy .
(The current method used by our lab is not affected by therapeutic doses of heparin).
Thrombin inhibitors may lead to an over- 
estimation of antithrombin level .117  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Interpretation
Activated 
protein C 
resistance 
(APC-R).Resistance against 
activated protein C .≥	120	seconds
If < 120 seconds 
sample is regarded as APC-R positive
In these cases, PCR 
for factor V Leiden is important .Congenital:• Factor V Leiden  
(mutation in factor V).
Acquired:• Lupus anticoagulant .
• Increased factor VIII levels .
• Oestrogen-containing oral 
contraceptives .
• Hormonal replacement therapy .
• Pregnancy .
The presence of thrombin inhibitors may lead to false negative results and aprotinin may lead to false positive results .
Insensitive to heparin  
(UFH and LMWH up to 1 IU/ml).
Factor V Leiden 
PCRDetect a mutation Arg 506Glu in factor V . 
This mutation destroys 
the cleavage site of FVa by activated protein C and results in a slower  inactivation of factor Va by activated prot C .Detects heterozygotes and 
homozygotes  for Factor V Leiden with 
a higher risk of thrombosis .Guide to laboratory tests  |  118
Analyte What is tested Ref. Range Interpretation
Prothrombin 
gene mutation 
PCRDetect a mutation 
G20210A in the 3’ 
untranslated region of 
the prothrombin gene .
This mutation is 
associated with elevated levels of prothrombin . Detects heterozygotes and homozygotes for this mutation with a 
higher risk of thrombosis .
Plasminogen Fibrinolytic activity . 75	−	150% ↓: DIC. 
Liver cirrhosis . 
During and after fibrinolytic therapy,  
Newborn .
↑: Acute-phase and malignant disease .
Lupus 
anticoagulantSee separate table .119  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Testing for the presence of a lupus anticoagulant
Test What is tested Ref. Range Interpretation
Dilute Russell’s 
viper venom testThe venom activates FX directly and triggers the coagulation 
pathway downstream .<1.2 ratio
If >1.2, a 
confirmatory test based on the addition of phospholipids is done . Increased: • Lupus anticoagulant .
• Factor deficiency (X,V, II and fibrinogen). 
• Other clotting factor inhibitor .
The presence of a lupus anticoagulant is confirmed if the patient time is shortened by the addition of phospholipids .
(screen test ratio / confirmed ratio  > 1.15).
If a clotting factor deficiency or oral 
anticoagulation, correction will be obtained with addition of normal plasma and not with phospholipids . 
If other clotting factor inhibitor, no correction 
will be obtained with either normal plasma or 
phospholipids .
Kaolin clotting 
timeModified aPTT test without added phospholipid .<1.2 ratio
Increased:• Lupus anticoagulant .
• Other clotting factor defects .
If correction with platelet neutralization procedure, it supports the presence of a lupus anticoagulant .Guide to laboratory tests  |  120
Test What is tested Ref. Range Interpretation
Lupus sensitive 
PTTThe reagent has been sensitized to aid the detection of lupus 
anticoagulants .31.6 – 44   
seconds
Prolonged:
• Lupus anticoagulant .
• Intrinsic pathway factor deficiencies or 
inhibitors . 
• Dysfibrinogenaemia .
• Presence of heparin and warfarin .
• Treatment with thrombin inhibitors . 
• DIC .
If correction is obtained with platelet neutralization procedure it confirms the presence of a lupus anticoagulant, while correction with normal plasma supports a clotting factor deficiency .
Monitoring of anticoagulation therapy
INR (International normalised ratio)
Standardised way of reporting the Prothrombin time (To compensate for different laboratories using 
different reagents and instruments).
Developed for the standardisation of oral anticoagulant treatment . Using the INR system, the 
patient’s INR should be approximately the same in any laboratory worldwide .
Used for monitoring of warfarin therapy .
Therapeutic target varies according to the indication for warfarin, but generally aimed at 2 – 3.5INR >4 – usually over anticoagulated 
INR <2 – usually under anticoagulated121  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Antifactor Xa activity (IU/ml)
Used for monitoring of low molecular weight heparin therapy .
The medication type (pharmaceutical name) and the time of the last dose should always be 
supplied .
Sample should be taken 3 hours after the last dose on Day 2 of treatment , especially if renal 
dysfunction is present .
Expected Anti-Xa activity levels for patients on therapy are as follows:
Prophylaxis:  0.3 – 0.5 IU/ml
Therapeutic:  0.5 – 1.2  IU/ml
Valve replacement: 1.0 – 1.2 IU/ml
Direct thrombin inhibitor (DTI):
Haemoclot: For the measurement of Dabigatran (Pradaxa) levels.
Haemoclot Thrombin Inhibitors is an in vitro diagnostic test intended to be used for the quantitative 
measurement of direct thrombin inhibitors, such as dabigatran, in human citrated plasma .  It is 
a clotting method based on the inhibition of a constant and defined concentration of thrombin . 
It is intended for prescriptive use . Measuring DTI concentrations in patient’s plasma may be used 
as an aid in the management of patients receiving DTIs who are suspected of having excess anticoagulant activity .
Pradaxa is a direct thrombin inhibitor with a mean half-life of 12 – 17 hours . It is eliminated 
unchanged primarily in the urine (85%). The rate of elimination by the kidney depends on the individual patient’s kidney function; the half-life of Pradaxa is prolonged in cases of renal impairment .
The Haemoclot direct inhibitor assay determines dabigatran plasma concentration:Guide to laboratory tests  |  122
Expected plasma levels
Two hours after dosing ng/ml 10 - 16 hours after dosing ng/ml
150 mg bd 175 (117 – 275) 91 (61 – 143)
110 mg bd 126 (85 – 200) 65 (43 – 102)
Bone marrow investigation
Bone marrow aspirate and trephine biopsy can be done to assess the bone marrow status . It is 
usually done under local anaesthetic or under conscious sedation from the posterior iliac crest of 
the pelvic bone . Aspirated cells and bone marrow particles are spread onto slides, which allow 
evaluation of cytological detail, and iron stores can be assessed . The trephine biopsy is fixed and 
processed for histology assessment .
Indications for bone marrow investigation
• Unexplained cytopenias e .g. anaemia, thrombocytopenia, neutropenia and pancytopenia .
• Suspected bone marrow disorders or infiltration e .g. leukaemia, chronic myeloproliferative 
neoplasm, myeloma, storage disease, metastatic disease, myelodysplasia, aplastic anaemia .
• As part of a staging procedure in lymphoma .
• Suspected infection e .g. TB, fungi .
Special investigations that can be done on bone marrow aspirate
• Chromosome analysis (cytogenetics), FISH (fluorescent in situ hybridization) for specific 
molecular abnormalities and PCR analysis .
• Immunophenotyping of abnormal populations of cells with flow cytometry .
• These tests are used to aid in the diagnosis, sub-classification and prognostification of haematological malignancies . Also used to detect evidence of residual disease after 
treatment .
• Microbiological cultures e .g. tuberculosis, MCS and fungus culture .123  |  Ampath Desk Reference
Flow cytometry
Automated technique where cells are incubated with different monoclonal antibodies that are 
conjugated to different fluorochromes .  The labelled cells are then passed in a fluid stream past a 
laser light source, which allows quantification of antigen expression on the population of interest .
Depending on the underlying pathology, various panels of antibodies can be used to identify the immunophenotype of an abnormal population of cells .
The technique is very important in the diagnosis and classification of acute and chronic leukaemias and lymphomas, to detect minimal residual disease during disease follow-up and may provide valuable prognostic information . It is also used in the diagnosis of PNH  
(paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria).
Flow cytometry can be performed on blood samples, bone marrow aspirate, FNA samples and 
body fluids e .g. pleural effusions, ascites fluid and CSF .
Sample needed: EDTA (purple top) or heparin (green top).
At our laboratory, flow cytometry testing and data analysis are being performed in accordance with 
EuroFlow protocols .
The EuroFlow protocol is a standardised method of flow cytometric testing for the diagnosis and classification of haematological malignancies .  It is currently the only available protocol that is 
completely validated and standardised at every stage of flow cytometry testing .  The adoption 
of this protocol ensures that our laboratory is able to maintain an international standard in haematological flow cytometry .  
Tests used in the investigation of a haemolytic process
Reticulocyte count
Reticulocytes are young red cells, which contain remnants of RNA .
Normal range: 0.5 – 2.5 %  (absolute count 50 – 100 x 109/l)Guide to laboratory tests  |  124
Increase with increased erythropoietic activity e .g. blood loss, haemolysis and response on 
haematinic replacement therapy .
Decreased: red cell production defect e .g. bone marrow disorders and dietary deficiencies .
Reticulocyte production index (RPI)
The reticulocyte production index (RPI) can be calculated to assess whether the reticulocyte 
response is appropriate for the degree of the anaemia .
RPI: 1 – when Hb is normal and marrow activity normal
RPI >2.5 – when anaemia is due to haemolysis, bleeding or hyposplenism and bone marrow 
response is normal
RPI <2 − when anaemia is due to marrow failure for any reason e .g. iron deficiency, vit B12 / folate 
deficiency or bone marrow infiltration
Direct Coombs test
Detect the coating of red cells by immunoglobulins and / or complement .
Causes for a positive Direct Coombs include:Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia (warm type and cold type).  
Alloimmune haemolytic anaemia (mismatched transfusion, haemolytic disease of the newborn and 
following solid organ or bone marrow transplantation).  
Drug induced immune haemolytic anaemia . 
False adsorption of antibodies to the surface of the red cells (occurs in some cases of HIV).
Osmotic fragility
Red cells are suspended in different concentrations of saline and the degree of haemolysis is assessed by spectophotometry .  Spherocytes have an increased volume / surface area ratio and 
are therefore more susceptible to lysis than normal red blood cells . 125  |  Ampath Desk Reference
If the blood smear shows a picture of spherocytic haemolysis, it is usual practice to start with a Direct 
Coombs test .  If negative, an osmotic fragility could be done and if that is increased, a sample 
should be sent for red cell membrane protein electrophoresis to confirm a possible congenital spherocytosis .
Hb electrophoresis / Abnormal haemoglobin screen
A lysate of red cells is applied to a gel and an electronic current is applied at an acid and alkaline pH . 
Different haemoglobins show different migration patterns . 
Indication: to detect the presence of inherited haemoglobin defects e .g. Hb S (sickle cell disorders), 
Hb E, Hb C, Hb D, Hb H and thalassaemia . 
Our laboratory has changed to a new method of using ion-exchange high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) to detect abnormal haemoglobin in whole blood and to determine the percentages of Hb A2 and HbF . 
Testing for haemosiderin in the urine
It can be used as a marker of intravascular haemolysis . 
With intravascular haemolysis, haemoglobin is released from the red blood cells into the bloodstream in excess of the binding capacity of haptoglobin . The excess haemoglobin is then 
filtered by the kidney and reabsorbed in the proximal tubule .  The iron portion then gets stored as 
ferritin or haemosiderin . 
When the tubule cells get sloughed off, the haemosiderin gets excreted into the urine .  It can remain 
in the urine for several weeks .  
Haptoglobin assay can also be used as a more reliable marker for intravascular haemolysis . A 
decreased level of haptoglobin will support the presence of intravascular haemolysis .Guide to laboratory tests  |  126
PNH screen (paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria)
Haemosiderin in the urine – confirms the presence of intravascular haemolysis . 
Flow cytometry: at our laboratory, we perform immunophenotyping of the neutrophils for the 
expression of FLAER and CD24 and monocytes for the expression of CD14 and FLAER . In PNH, there is 
a decreased expression of these antigens .
Sample needed: peripheral blood (EDTA or heparin).
Testing for inherited enzyme abnormalities
• Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase defiency (G6PD).
A screening test is done and if positive, a quantitative test should be done for confirmation .
Reticulocytes have higher G6PDH levels and therefore false negative results may be obtained if testing is done during a reticulocytosis .
• Pyruvate kinase deficiency screen .
Malaria testing
• Thin smear – used for species identification and quantification of parasite load . 
• Thick smear – higher detection rate, but cannot be used for species identification or quantification .
• Fluorescent microscopy/Quantitative Buffy Coat method (malaria parasites fluorescent after staining with acridine orange).  Fairly sensitive, but false positives may occur in the presence of Howell Jolly bodies and reticulocytes .  May be used as an additional screening test .   
Increases the detection rate and is more sensitive than the thick smear .
• Malaria antigen testing based on the presence of certain malaria antigens (pLDH and HRP-2). It aids in the detection and identification of malaria and is usually used in conjunction with the thin smear .
• Malaria PCR – parasite nucleic acids are detected .  Not suitable for routine diagnostic use, 
but may be useful in selected cases – most useful for species identification .
• If malaria profile is negative, but clinical suspicion is high, repeat testing is advised .127  |  Ampath Desk Reference
JAK2 V617F PCR
Principle : A real-time polymerase chain reaction assay which is used to identify the JAK2 V617F 
mutation . 
Indication: It is usually requested where a chronic myeloproliferative neoplasm is suspected from the 
clinical picture, peripheral blood and / or bone marrow findings .
Sample type :  Blood or bone marrow collected in EDTA (purple top).
Clinical use and interpretation : 
The presence of the Jak-2 V617F mutation will support the diagnosis of an underlying chronic myeloproliferative neoplasm . 
A bone marrow investigation will usually be performed to confirm the diagnosis and to identify which 
type of myeloproliferative disorder is present . 
The highest incidence of the JAK2 V617F mutation is found in polycythaemia vera (65-97% of cases will be positive).  The mutation may also be present in approximately 50% of cases of essential thrombocythaemia and primary myelofibrosis .   
It is negative in CML (Chronic myelocytic leukaemia).
If polycythaemia vera is suspected clinically and the Jak-2 V617F PCR is negative, further screening for 
JAK2 exon 12 mutations can be arranged .
Please take note that a negative JAK2 screen does not exclude the presence of a chronic 
myeloproliferative disorder . 